>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY APRIL, 18: ISIS
EXPANDS ITS REACH.
AUTHORITIES BLAME THE TERROR
GROUP FOR A SUICIDE BOMBING THAT
KILLED DOZENS OF PEOPLE IN
AFGHANISTAN.
TURMOIL IN IRAQ, SYRIA AND
YEMEN.
A FORMER NATIONAL SECURITY
OFFICIAL WEIGHS IN ON WHAT IT
MEANS FOR THE UNITED STATES.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WILL A LAWSUIT FILED ON BEHALF
OF TEENAGED ENVIRONMENTAL
ACTIVISTS FORCE THE GOVERNMENT
TO DO MORE TO FIGHT CLIMATE
CHANGE?
NEXT ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS OF
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING.
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
ISIS IS BEING BLAMED FOR A
TERROR ATTACK IN ANOTHER PART OF
THE WORLD TODAY, AFGHANISTAN.
THE PRESIDENT OF THAT COUNTRY
SAYS THE EXTREMIST GROUP WAS
RESPONSIBLE FOR A SUICIDE
BOMBING THAT LEFT AT LEAST 33
PEOPLE DEAD AND AN ESTIMATED 100
WOUNDED.
THE ATTACK OCCURRED OUTSIDE A
BANK IN THE EASTERN CITY OF
JALALABAD.
THE VICTIMS HAD GATHERED THERE
TO COLLECT THEIR PAYCHECKS.
A SPOKESMAN FOR THE TALIBAN,
WHICH HAS BEEN AT WAR WITH THE
WESTERN-BACKED GOVERNMENT IN
AFGHANISTAN, ALSO CONDEMNED
TODAY'S ATTACK.
WE'LL HAVE MORE AFTER THE NEWS
SUMMARY.
A SUSPECTED TERROR PLOT IN
AUSTRALIA HAS BEEN FOILED.
AUTHORITIES IN MELBOURNE
ARRESTED FIVE TEENS SAID TO HAVE
BEEN PLANNING AN ATTACK ON
POLICE DURING A WORLD WAR I
COMMEMORATION NEXT WEEK.
THE FIVE TEENS, ALL 18 OR 19
YEARS OLD, ARE ALL DESCRIBED AS
ISIS SYMPATHIZERS.
THERE HAS BEEN A SHARP SPIKE IN
TERROR-RELATED ARRESTS IN
AUSTRALIA IN THE PAST SIX
MONTHS.
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
STRUCK A MORE CONCILIATORY TONE
TOWARD THE UNITED STATES TODAY.
DURING A TELEVISION INTERVIEW,
HE SAID THE TWO COUNTRIES SHARE
WHAT HE CALLED A COMMON AGENDA.
AND PUTIN SAID RUSSIA IS
PREPARED TO WORK WITH WHOEVER IS
ELECTED PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES NEXT YEAR.
RELATIONS BETWEEN THE TWO
COUNTRIES HAVE DETERIORATED
SINCE RUSSIA'S ANNEXATION OF
CRIMEA AND THE SUBSEQUENT
SANCTIONS IMPOSED AGAINST IT.
CALIFORNIA TODAY MODIFIED ITS
PROPOSED DROUGHT RESTRICTIONS.
THE STATE'S WATER RESOURCES
CONTROL BOARD SAID THE NEW RULES
WOULD REDUCE CUTS TO COMMUNITIES
THAT HAVE TAKEN STEPS TO SAVE
WATER BUT WOULD INCREASE CUTS ON
MORE WASTEFUL COMMUNITIES.
THE GOAL IS TO HAVE THE NEW
RULES IN PLACE BEFORE SUMMERTIME
WHEN WATER USAGE SPIKES.
A NEW REPORT SAYS THE CATHOLIC
CHURCH IN THE UNITED STATES
SPENT MORE THAN $150 MILLION
DURING A 12-MONTH PERIOD ENDING
LAST SUMMER ON CHILD ABUSE
CASES, THE VAST MAJORITY OF THE
SUM ON LEGAL SETTLEMENTS WITH
VICTIMS.
IT SAID MOST OF THE ABUSE CASES
OCCURRED FROM THE 1960s TO THE
1980s.
THE CHURCH SPENT THE REST OF THE
MONEY, ALMOST $32 MILLION, WAS
ON WHAT THE CHURCH CALLS "SAFE
ENVIRONMENT" TRAINING PROGRAMS.
TWO WEEKS AFTER A POLICEMAN SHOT
AND KILLED WALTER SCOTT IN NORTH
CHARLESTON, THE LOCAL CHAPTER OF
THE N.A.A.C.P. IS CALLING ON THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT TO
INVESTIGATE ALL FATAL SHOOTINGS
BY POLICE IN THAT SOUTH CAROLINA
COMMUNITY DURING THE PAST TWO
DECADES.
THE GROUP CLAIMS AUTHORITIES
THERE DELIBERATELY FILED FALSE
REPORTS AND TAMPERED WITH
EVIDENCE TO PROTECT OFFICERS
INVOLVED IN THE FATAL SHOOTINGS
OF AFRICAN-AMERICANS, WHAT THEY
CALL A "BLUE WALL OF SILENCE."
AND NEARLY 20 REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL HOPEFULS ARE IN
NASHUA, NEW HAMPSHIRE, THIS
WEEKEND FOR WHAT THE STATE
REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE CALLS THE
"FIRST IN THE NATION" FORUM.
THE STATE'S ALWAYS INFLUENTIAL
PRIMARY IS NOW A LITTLE LESS
THAN TEN MONTHS AWAY.
AND THERE MAY BE A SCIENTIFIC
EXPLANATION FOR THOSE LOVING
FEELINGS YOU HAVE WHEN YOU LOOK
INTO YOUR DOG'S EYES.
RESEARCHERS IN JAPAN SAY A
CHEMICAL CALLED OXYTOCIN,
SOMETIMES CALLED THE LOVE
HORMONE, IS RELEASED IN YOUR
BRAIN, PROMPTING THOSE GOOD
FEELINGS TO WASH OVER YOU.
IT'S NOT UNREQUITED LOVE.
THE SCIENTISTS SAYS THE DOGS ARE
EXPERIENCING THE SAME CHEMICAL
RELEASE AND PRESUMABLY THE SAME
LOVING FEELINGS.
>> Sreenivasan: TODAY'S BOMBING
IN AFGHANISTAN CAPS A CHAOTIC
WEEK THROUGHOUT MUCH OF THE
MUSLIM WORLD.
VIOLENT CONFLICTS ARE NOW RAGING
IN IRAQ, SYRIA AND YEMEN, AND
THE THREAT POSED BY TERROR
GROUPS LIKE ISIS AND AL QAEDA ON
THE ARABIAN PENINSULA SEEMINGLY
ARE INTENSIFYING.
TO HELP US ANALYZE THESE
DEVELOPMENTS, WE ARE JOINED FROM
WASHINGTON BY ANTHONY CORDESMAN
OF THE CENTER FOR STRATEGIC AND
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES.
MR. CORDESMAN PREVIOUSLY SERVED
IN THE STATE DEPARTMENT AND WAS
THE DIRECTOR OF INTELLIGENCE
ASSESSMENT IN THE OFFICE OF THE
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE.
IT'S NEARLY 2,000 MILES FROM
DAMASCUS SYRIA TO KABUL,
AFGHANISTAN.
AND VIOLENCE SEEMS TO BE
SPREADING THROUGHOUT THE ENTIRE
REGION.
WHAT'S THE BIGGER PICTURE THAT
WE NEED TO UNDERSTAND?
>> I'M AFRAID THAT IS THE BIGGER
PICTURE BECAUSE WHAT WE ARE
WATCHING AND WE HAVE BEEN
WATCHING ALMOST SINCE 2010 IS A
VERY SHARP RISE IN THE NUMBER OF
TERRORIST INCIDENTS.
AND NOW WHAT WE'RE WATCHING IS
CIVIL WAR AND BASICALLY SOME
FORMS OF INSURGENCY.
>> Sreenivasan: WE MENTIONED
THAT SUICIDE BOMBING IN EASTERN
AFGHANISTAN TODAY, THAT THE
PRESIDENT OF THAT COUNTRY BLAMES
ON ISIS.
HOW SIGNIFICANT IS IT THAT ISIS
IS NOW INVOLVED IN AFGHANISTAN?
>> WE NEED TO BE VERY CAREFUL.
I THINK PART OF THE PROBLEM IS
IT'S CONVENIENT TO BLAME ISIS IF
YOU'RE TRYING TO NEGOTIATE WITH
THE TALIBAN.
BUT A LOT OF GROUPS HAVE SORT OF
HAD THIS COSMETIC SET OF
ALIGNMENTS WITH THE ISLAMIC
STATE WITHOUT THERE BEING REAL
TIES.
THESE MOVEMENTS ARE GENERALLY
INDEPENDENT.
AND LONG BEFORE ANY OF THESE
ALIGNMENTS OCCURRED,
AFGHANISTAN, FOR EXAMPLE, SAW A
VERY SHARP RISE IN CASUALTIES
LAST YEAR.
THERE'S BEEN ANOTHER RISE THIS
YEAR.
WHAT I THINK WE HAD HOPED FOR IN
TERMS OF A MUCH STRONGER
AFGHAN FORCES, A MUCH
STRONGER AFGHANISTAN GOVERNMENT,
HAS YET TO APPEAR.
THERE CERTAINLY IS NO MORE
STABILITY IN AFGHANISTAN THAN
THERE IS IN YEMEN OR SYRIA OR
IRAQ OR ON THE OTHER AREAS IN
THIS REGION.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU MENTIONED
IRAQ, AND ISIS FORCES ARE NOW
BATTLING GOVERNMENT TROOPS FOR
CONTROL OF RAMADI AND THE
NATION'S LARGEST OIL REFINERY.
WHAT DOES THIS SAY ABOUT THE
EFFECTIVENESS OF OUR BOMBING
CAMPAIGN AGAINST THEM?
>> WE'RE DEALING WITH A
SCATTERED FORCE.
IT ISN'T REALLY DEPENDENT ON A
LOT OF HEAVY EQUIPMENT.
IT CAN EMBED ITSELF IN BUILDINGS
AND CITIES, WHICH MAKES BOMBING
VERY DIFFICULT UNLESS IT'S
SUPPORTED BY GROUND TROOPS.
IN BOTH THE CASE OF RAMADI AND
THE REFINERY THAT IS NOT
SOMETHING WHERE AIR POWER ALONE
CAN BE FULLY EFFECTIVE.
WHERE IT HAS DONE WELL IS
REDUCING THE REVENUES THEY'VE
HAD THROUGH OIL EXPORTS.
IT HAS HAD SOME IMPACT ON
HITTING KEY LEADERSHIP CADRES,
BUT THIS BOMBING CAMPAIGN SO FAR
HAS BEEN RELATIVELY LIMITED AND
IT HAS NOT HAD ANY MAJOR
STRATEGIC IMPACT.
>> Sreenivasan: IF WE TURN OUR
SPOTLIGHT TO YEMEN FOR A SECOND,
YESTERDAY AL QAEDA FORCES SEIZED
DOZENS OF TANKS, ROCKET
LAUNCHERS, SMALL ARMS.
HOW CONCERNING IS THAT GROUP'S
GAINS GIVEN THAT IT WAS
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE PARIS
TERRORIST ATTACKS IN JANUARY?
>> WELL, IT IS CONCERNING
BECAUSE IT ALSO IS THE MOVEMENT
WHICH HAS BEEN BEST ORGANIZED IN
TRYING TO LAUNCH ATTACKS AGAINST
THE UNITED STATES.
A REBIRTH OF THAT GROUP,
AL QAEDA IN THE ARABIAN
PENINSULA, IS SERIOUSLY
DANGEROUS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT ABOUT THE
HUMANITARIAN ASPECT OF ALL THIS?
THE MOST RECENT ESTIMATES FROM
THE U.S. AID FOR SYRIA ARE A
GOOD EXAMPLE.
HAS A POPULATION OF A LITTLE
OVER 18 MILLION.
THERE'S SOMETHING LIKE 3.7
MILLION THAT HAVE BEEN DRIVEN
OUT OF THE COUNTRY AS REFUGEES.
MORE THAN FOUR MILLION PEOPLE
ARE SO CAUGHT UP IN THE FIGHTING
THAT THERE'S NO FORM OF AID THAT
CAN REACH THEM.
JUST OVER THE LAST FEW WEEKS,
WE'VE SEEN SOMETHING CLOSE TO
THAT BUILDING UP IN YEMEN-- A
BREAKDOWN IN FOOD SUPPLY, IN
BASIC OPERATIONS OF THE ECONOMY,
THE SPREAD OF VIOLENCE
THROUGHOUT THE ENTIRE COUNTRY IN
THE POPULATED AREAS.
SO THE HUMAN COST JUST KEEPS
RISING.
>> Sreenivasan: IF SOMEONE'S
JUST KIND OF OPENING UP THE
PAPER, SO TO SPEAK, OR WATCHING
THIS PROGRAM, CONSIDERING THE
STRING OF HEADLINES THAT THEY'VE
BEEN SEEING ALL WEEK, WHAT
SHOULD THE TAKEAWAY BE?
>> THIS IS GOING TO BE A VERY
LONG SET OF STRUGGLES.
IT ISN'T CENTERED IN ONE PLACE.
WE'RE GOING TO BE DEALING WITH
THIS PROBLEM FOR YEARS.
WE'VE ALREADY SAID WE'VE HAD OUR
CHIEF MILITARY WARN US THAT IN
IRAQ IT COULD EASILY BE YEARS
BEFORE MOSUL IS LIBERATED, AND
NO ONE HAS SAID ANYTHING ABOUT
WHEN THIS CONFLICT WILL END IN
SYRIA, END IN YEMEN, END IN
AFGHANISTAN.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
ANTHONY CORDESMAN JOINING US
FROM WASHINGTON, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Sreenivasan: WEDNESDAY IS
EARTH DAY, AND PRESIDENT OBAMA
IS EXPECTED TO TRAVEL TO FLORIDA
TO HIGHLIGHT THE ISSUE OF
CLIMATE CHANGE.
TODAY, THOUSANDS GATHERED IN THE
NATION'S CAPITAL FOR A RALLY AND
A FREE CONCERT TO CALL FOR
SWIFTER ACTION TO REDUCE
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS.
THAT'S THE GOAL OF SOME
TEENAGERS IN OREGON, TOO.
THEY'VE TEAMED UP WITH
ENVIRONMENTAL LAWYERS THERE AND
HAVE GONE TO COURT TO TRY TO
COMPEL THE STATE TO DO MORE,
SOONER.
THE NEWSHOUR'S MEGAN THOMPSON
EXPLAINS THEIR NOVEL LEGAL
APPROACH IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE
PIECE FROM EUGENE, OREGON.
>> Reporter: A CROWD PARADED
RECENTLY OUTSIDE THE COURTHOUSE
IN EUGENE, OREGON.
KIDS, TEACHERS, PARENTS-- THERE
WERE EVEN SINGING GRANDMAS-- ALL
HOPING TO DRAW ATTENTION TO WHAT
THIS YOUNG WOMAN WAS DOING
INSIDE.
>> YOUR HONOR, I HAVE COUNSEL
TABLE WITH ME THIS MORNING, THIS
AFTERNOON, KELSEY JULIANA, ONE
OF THE PLAINTIFFS.
>> Reporter: KELSEY JULIANA IS
ONLY 19 YEARS OLD, BUT SHE'S
SUING THE STATE OF OREGON,
CLAIMING IT'S NOT DOING NEARLY
ENOUGH TO STOP CLIMATE CHANGE
AND PREVENT THE EFFECTS IT WILL
HAVE ON HER GENERATION AND THOSE
TO COME.
>> IF THE STATE DOES NOT ACT
NOW, WE ARE FACING IRREVERSIBLE,
CATASTROPHIC CRISES.
>> Reporter: JULIANA, WHO
DELAYED HER FIRST SEMESTER OF
COLLEGE LAST FALL TO PARTICIPATE
IN A CLIMATE WALK ACROSS THE
COUNTRY, HAS BEEN ACTIVE ON THE
ISSUE FOR YEARS.
>> I'VE BEEN DOING CLIMATE
ACTIVISM WORK SINCE FIFTH GRADE,
AND, YOU KNOW, THAT STARTED WITH
ME, YOU KNOW, GETTING MY
FRIENDS, MY SOCCER TEAM TOGETHER
AND SPENDING A DAY MARCHING AND
HOLDING UP SIGNS.
>> Reporter: IN 2011, JULIANA
AND ANOTHER PLAINTIFF TEAMED UP
WITH A LOCAL ENVIRONMENTAL
ACTIVIST GROUP, OUR CHILDREN'S
TRUST, TO FILE THE LAWSUIT
AGAINST THE STATE.
JULIANA WAS JUST 15.
BUT IT'S NOT ONLY HER AGE THAT'S
DRAWN ATTENTION TO THIS CASE,
IT'S ALSO THE LEGAL APPROACH
THAT'S BEING USED, ALL STARTED
BY UNIVERSITY OF OREGON LAW
PROFESSOR MARY CHRISTINA WOOD
>> IT WAS REALLY THE MOMENT WHEN
HURRICANE KATRINA HIT AND I
RECOGNIZED THAT CLIMATE CRISIS
HAD NOT BEEN ADDRESSED PROPERLY
BY GOVERNMENT, AND THE CRISIS
WAS WORSENING WITH GREAT
URGENCY.
AND ENVIRONMENTAL LAW HAD
LARGELY FAILED TO ADDRESS MANY
OF THE MOST SIGNIFICANT PROBLEMS
WE FACE.
SO, TO ME, THE PUBLIC TRUST
DOCTRINE WAS THE LOGICAL
RESPONSE.
>> Reporter: THE PUBLIC TRUST
DOCTRINE IS A LEGAL THEORY THAT
ESSENTIALLY SAYS GOVERNMENT
SHOULD HOLD CERTAIN NATURAL
RESOURCES IN TRUST FOR THE
PUBLIC.
IT CAN BE TRACED BACK TO ANCIENT
ROMAN LAW AND ENGLISH COMMON
LAW.
IN THE U.S., IT'S MOSTLY BEEN
USED TO GUARANTEE PUBLIC ACCESS
TO WATERWAYS AND BECAME PART OF
AMERICAN CASE LAW BACK IN THE
1890s IN A SUPREME COURT RULING
THAT PRIVATE DEVELOPERS IN
CHICAGO COULDN'T PREVENT PUBLIC
ACCESS TO LAKE MICHIGAN.
BUT IN THE 1970s, ENVIRONMENTAL
LAWYERS BEGAN ARGUING THAT THE
PUBLIC TRUST DOCTRINE SHOULD BE
EXTENDED TO OTHER RESOURCES LIKE
WILDLIFE OR EVEN THE AIR, AND
THAT IT SHOULD COMPEL
GOVERNMENTS TO PROTECT THESE
RESOURCES, TOO.
AND NOW, PROFESSOR WOOD SAYS, IT
SHOULD BE EXTENDED TO PROTECT
THE ATMOSPHERE, AS WELL.
>> IT OBVIOUSLY APPLIES TO THE
ATMOSPHERE BECAUSE THE
ATMOSPHERE CONTROLS THE CLIMATE
SYSTEM WE ALL DEPEND ON FOR
SURVIVAL.
>> Reporter: WOOD THOUGHT, IF
THE ATMOSPHERE COULD BE
CONSIDERED A RESOURCE COVERED BY
THE PUBLIC TRUST DOCTRINE, THEN
MAYBE COURTS COULD FORCE
GOVERNMENTS TO TAKE ADDITIONAL
STEPS TO REDUCE GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS.
SHE CALLED HER IDEA "ATMOSPHERIC
TRUST LITIGATION" AND WORKED
WITH WELL-KNOWN CLIMATE
SCIENTIST JAMES HANSEN.
HE SAYS WE NEED TO REDUCE
EMISSIONS BY AT LEAST 6% A YEAR
AND PROPOSED SPECIFIC REMEDIES
LIKE A CARBON TAX TO HELP GET
THERE.
WOOD STARTED GIVING TALKS ABOUT
THE PLAN AND EVENTUALLY WROTE A
BOOK.
>> THE PROBLEM WITH CLIMATE IS
THAT THERE IS MIND-BLOWING
URGENCY, AND WE HAVE NOW
NATURE'S LAWS TO CONTEND WITH.
AND SO, WHAT ATMOSPHERIC TRUST
LITIGATION ASKS IS THAT
GOVERNMENT HAVE A PLAN.
>> AND SO, I HEARD A TALK THAT
MARY WOOD GAVE AT THE UNIVERSITY
OF OREGON ABOUT USING THE PUBLIC
TRUST DOCTRINE TO COMPEL
GOVERNMENTS TO PROTECT OUR
CLIMATE SYSTEM FOR FUTURE
GENERATIONS.
>> Reporter: ENVIRONMENTAL
ATTORNEY JULIA OLSON WAS SO
INSPIRED THAT SHE DECIDED TO PUT
WOOD'S IDEAS INTO PRACTICE.
IN 2010, SHE CO-FOUNDED OUR
CHILDREN'S TRUST, THE GROUP THAT
BACKED JULIANA'S CASE IN OREGON.
BUT IT'S NOT JUST HAPPENING
HERE; KIDS BACKED BY THE GROUP
HAVE BROUGHT LAWSUITS AGAINST
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AND IN 14
OTHER STATES, ALTHOUGH THE CASE
IN OREGON HAS GOTTEN THE
FURTHEST ALONG.
AND THE IDEA'S CATCHING ON
GLOBALLY, TOO; SIMILAR LAWSUITS
HAVE BEEN FILED IN UKRAINE,
UGANDA, THE PHILIPPINES AND THE
NETHERLANDS.
IT'S ALL BEEN DONE WITH THE HELP
OF AN ARMY OF ATTORNEYS AND
SCIENTISTS WORKING PRO BONO.
>> WE'RE TRYING TO SPREAD THE
MESSAGE THAT PEOPLE EVERYWHERE,
ALL OVER THE WORLD, HOLD THESE
FUNDAMENTAL, INALIENABLE RIGHTS
TO HAVE THEIR ESSENTIAL NATURAL
RESOURCES PROTECTED FOR
THEMSELVES AND FOR FUTURE
GENERATIONS, FOR THEIR CHILDREN
AND GREAT-GRANDCHILDREN.
>> Reporter: MANY OF THE
LAWSUITS, INCLUDING THE FEDERAL
SUIT, HAVE BEEN DISMISSED.
AND WHILE A COUPLE OF STATE
JUDGES HAVE BEEN RECEPTIVE TO
THE IDEA THAT THE PUBLIC TRUST
COULD INCLUDE THE ATMOSPHERE,
NONE HAS FORCED STATE
GOVERNMENTS TO TAKE ACTION.
RICHARD STEWART IS A PROFESSOR
OF ENVIRONMENTAL LAW AT NEW YORK
UNIVERSITY AND EXPLAINED THE
PLAINTIFFS IN OREGON WILL HAVE
AN UPHILL BATTLE, TOO.
>> IT'S AN INTERESTING AND
INTRIGUING IDEA, BUT THERE ARE A
NUMBER OF PROBLEMS.
ONE, IT GOES WAY BEYOND WHAT ANY
STATE COURT HAS DONE THUS FAR.
SECONDLY, THE ATMOSPHERE IS
GLOBAL AND GREENHOUSE GASES MIX
GLOBALLY, SO OREGON CAN BY NO
MEANS SOLVE THE PROBLEM, EVEN
THE PROBLEM IN OREGON.
THE THIRD PROBLEM IS PROVIDING A
REMEDY, AND MANY COURTS IN...
THERE HAVE BEEN CASES BROUGHT IN
OTHER STATES THAT HAVE SAID
"THIS IS REALLY FOR THE
POLITICAL BRANCHES, THIS IS
BEYOND THE CAPACITY OF THE
JUDICIARY TO MANAGE."
>> Reporter: IN FACT, THE
CIRCUIT COURT JUDGE IN OREGON
ORIGINALLY TOSSED OUT JULIANA'S
CASE ON PROCEDURAL GROUNDS BASED
ON THAT VERY ARGUMENT.
BUT LAST YEAR, AN OREGON APPEALS
COURT GAVE OUR CHILDREN'S TRUST
ONE OF ITS BIGGEST WINS SO FAR,
ORDERING THE CASE BACK TO THE
LOWER COURT FOR A DECISION ON
THE MERITS.
FOUR YEARS AFTER THE PLAINTIFFS
FILED THEIR LAWSUIT, THEY
FINALLY GOT THEIR DAY IN COURT
ON APRIL 7, HERE AT THE LANE
COUNTY CIRCUIT COURT IN EUGENE.
PEOPLE LINED UP TWO HOURS BEFORE
THE HEARING TO WATCH KELSEY
JULIANA'S CASE AGAINST THE STATE
OF OREGON.
BUT INTERESTINGLY, THE STATE
ITSELF DOESN'T DISPUTE MANY OF
THE BASIC UNDERLYING FACTS OF
THE CASE.
>> THE STATE OF OREGON AGREES
THAT CLIMATE CHANGE IS A SERIOUS
PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: PAUL GARRAHAN IS AN
ATTORNEY WITH THE OREGON
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE AND WAS
PART OF THE STATE'S LEGAL TEAM
AT THE HEARING.
THE STATE OF OREGON FOR DECADES
HAS BEEN AN ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY
LEADER.
OREGON IS ALREADY ONE OF THE
LOWEST GREENHOUSE GAS EMITTERS
IN THE COUNTRY AND IS ABOUT TO
SHUT DOWN ITS ONLY COAL-FIRED
POWER PLANT.
THE STATE EVEN HAS A GLOBAL
WARMING COMMISSION AND IS
ADOPTING A CLEAN FUELS PROGRAM.
GARRAHAN SAYS THE STATE SHARES
MANY OF THE PLAINTIFFS' GOALS,
BUT USING THE PUBLIC TRUST
DOCTRINE TO SUE IN COURT ISN'T
THE RIGHT WAY TO GO ABOUT
ACHIEVING THEM.
>> WE THINK THAT AS A
FUNDAMENTAL ISSUE OF DEMOCRATIC
GOVERNMENT, THOSE DECISIONS
SHOULD BE MADE BY THE
LEGISLATURE AND BY THE EXECUTIVE
BRANCH.
>> IT IS THE DUTY OF THE
LEGISLATURE...
>> Reporter: BUT THE PLAINTIFFS
ARGUE THERE'S NO TIME FOR A
DEBATE ABOUT THE ROLE OF VARIOUS
BRANCHES OF GOVERNMENT, AND
POINT TO A REPORT ISSUED BY THE
STATE ITSELF SHOWING ITS
PROPOSED PLANS DON'T PUT IT ON
TRACK TO ACHIEVE ITS OWN
EMISSIONS GOALS.
THE PLAINTIFFS ACKNOWLEDGE THAT
THE STATE IS TAKING LOTS OF
STEPS TO ADDRESS THIS, BUT THEY
SAY IT'S JUST NOT ENOUGH.
>> WELL, WE AGREE THAT THE STATE
CAN DO MORE, AND WE'RE
AGGRESSIVELY PUSHING POLICIES TO
DO MORE.
>> Reporter: JUDGES HAVE SAID,
"I'M A JUDGE, AND IT'S NOT MY
JOB TO TELL DEMOCRATICALLY
ELECTED LEGISLATURES AND STATE
OFFICIALS WHAT TO DO."
HOW DO YOU OVERCOME THAT?
>> IT'S ACTUALLY PRETTY SIMPLE.
SO, WE HAVE THREE BRANCHES OF
GOVERNMENT.
IT GOES BACK TO FIFTH GRADE
CIVICS.
AND ONE BRANCH OF GOVERNMENT,
THE LEGISLATURE, DOESN'T GET TO
BOTH INTERPRET THE CONSTITUTION,
WRITE THE LAWS AND THEN POLICE
THEMSELVES.
THAT WOULD BE A REAL
CONCENTRATION OF POWER IN ONE
BRANCH OF GOVERNMENT.
AND SO, WHAT WE'RE ASKING THE
COURT TO DO IS DO ITS JOB AND
INTERPRETING OUR PUBLIC TRUST
RIGHTS AND THEN ALSO BE THE
POLICE ON THE LEGISLATURE TO
DETERMINE WHETHER IT IS
UPHOLDING ITS DUTY TO MAKE LAWS
THAT PROTECT OUR RIGHTS.
>> Reporter: YOU HAVEN'T GOTTEN
ANY STATE GOVERNMENTS TO DO
THIS, AND OTHER PEOPLE HAVE, YOU
KNOW, CALLED THIS A BIT OF A
STRETCH.
WHY KEEP GOING WITH THIS?
>> WE HAVEN'T HAD A CHOICE BUT
TO KEEP GOING, AND I THINK ONE
OF THE IMPORTANT THINGS FOR
PEOPLE TO RECOGNIZE IS THE
URGENCY OF THE CRISIS.
AND IT'S ONLY OUR GENERATION
THAT CAN DEAL WITH THIS PROBLEM
AND STOP THE IRREVERSIBLE
IMPACTS THAT WE'RE CAUSING.
>> Reporter: OLSON AND HER TEAM
AT OUR CHILDREN'S TRUST AREN'T
SLOWING DOWN.
THEY PLAN TO FILE THREE MORE
STATE LAWSUITS AND ANOTHER
FEDERAL LAWSUIT, AND NEW
LAWSUITS ARE ALSO EXPECTED IN
INDIA AND PAKISTAN.
THE JUDGE IN OREGON SAYS HE WILL
MAKE HIS RULING IN THE NEXT
COUPLE OF MONTHS.
>> I HOPE THAT THE JUDGE WILL
RULE IN OUR FAVOR.
I HOPE THAT HE WILL LOOK ME IN
THE EYE AND UNDERSTAND THAT, YOU
KNOW, I AM RUNNING OUT OF TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: SHOULD STATES BE
HELD ACCOUNTABLE FOR THEIR
CONTRIBUTIONS TO CLIMATE CHANGE?
TAKE OUR POLL AND SHARE YOUR
VIEWS ON OUR WEB SITE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: A GROWING NUMBER
OF PSYCHIATRISTS ARE NO LONGER
ACCEPTING PRIVATE INSURANCE OR
MEDICARE AND PREFERRING TO
ACCEPT PATIENTS WHO PAY CASH.
THAT MEANS MANY, INCLUDING THOSE
AT GREATER RISK, CAN'T GET
PSYCHIATRIC CARE, A DEVELOPMENT
THAT CAN HAVE TRAGIC
CONSEQUENCES.
SHANNON PETTYPIECE OF BLOOMBERG
NEWS WROTE ABOUT RECENTLY AND
JOINS US NOW.
YOU FOUND A VERY DISTURBING
SCENARIO OF SOMEONE WHO HAD AN
APPOINTMENT TO SEE A DOCTOR, RAN
OUT OF MEDS BEFORE THEN, WHAT
HAPPENED?
>> WELL, BASICALLY HIS MOTHER
HAD BEEN TRYING FOR MONTHS TO
GET THIS MAN, WHO IS IN HIS
30s, WHO HAD BEEN HEARING
VOICES, HAVING PARANOIA,
THINKING THERE WERE DRONES
FLYING OVERHEAD, THE C.I.A. WAS
IN HIS APARTMENT.
EVERYONE KNEW SOMETHING WAS
WRONG.
HE HAD BEEN HOSPITALIZED AND IN
THE THE EMERGENCY ROOM BUT THE
FAMILY SAYS THEY JUST COULDN'T
GET HIM AN APPOINTMENT WITH A
PSYCHIATRIST IN TIME TO KEEP HIM
ON THE MEDICATION HE NEEDED.
EITHER DOCTORS DIDN'T TAKE THEIR
INSURANCE.
THEY WOULDN'T RETURN THEIR
CALLS, THEY HAD MONTHS-LONG WAIT
OR THEY DIDN'T WANT TO SEE HIM.
HE WAS A TOUGH PATIENT WITH A
HISTORY OF SUBSTANCE ABUSE,
PARANOIA.
HE WAS A DIFFICULT CASE.
DOCTORS PREFER AN EASIER CASE.
AFTER ALL OF THIS, HIS MOTHER,
HIS FRIENDS, HIS FAMILY TRYING
THEY FINALLY DID GET HIM AN
APPOINTMENT AND THE MEDICATION
RAN OUT.
AND IT ENDED VERY TRAGICALLY, HE
MURDERED HIS MOTHER WITH A
KITCHEN KNIFE, AND EVERYBODY IN
THE AFTERMATH WAS SAYING HOW
COULD SOMETHING LIKE THIS
HAPPEN?
HOW COULD A MAN WITH FAMILY
SUPPORT, IN A SUBURB OF NEW YORK
CITY, NOT BE ABLE TO GET HELP?
AND ONE OF THE MAIN REASONS IS
BECAUSE YOU HAVE SUCH A LIMITED
NUMBER OF DOCTORS WILLING TO
TAKE THE HARD CASES AND TAKE
PEOPLE WITH INSURANCE.
>> Sreenivasan: AND YOU
ABSTRACT UP FROM THAT AND YOU
TALK A LITTLE BIT ABOUT THE
CYCLES THAT ARE AT WORK HERE.
IT'S NOT JUST THE DOCTOR'S
FAULT.
IT'S REALLY THE SUPPLY, THE
DEMAND, THE WHOLE SYSTEM SEEMS
STACKED AGAINST SOMEONE LIKE
THIS GETTING THE CARE.
>> AND DOCTORS SAY WE'RE JUST
NOT GOING TO DEAL WITH IT.
THERE'S ENOUGH DEMAND FROM
PEOPLE WHO WILL PAY CASH SO
WE'LL JUST FOCUS ON THOSE
PATIENTS.
THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY SAYS
THEIR JOB IS TO GET THE BEST
VALUE FOR THEIR CUSTOMERS, WHICH
IS THE PATIENT.
YOU KNOW, THEY-- IF THEY HAVE TO
PAY DOCTORS MORE, THEY'RE GOING
TO HAVE TO INCREASE CO-PAYS AND
PREMIUMS.
NO ONE WANTS TO PAY FOR HEALTH
CARE THESE DAYS.
EVERYONE WANTS TO CONTROL COSTS.
SO THE INSURERS SAY THEY'RE
TRYING TO DO WHAT IS IN THE BEST
INTEREST OF THEIR CLIENTS.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS THE
LARGER PICTURE INFLUENCE?
HOW DID THE RECESSION PLAY INTO
THIS?
OR HOW DID OBAMACARE OR THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT PLAY INTO
THIS?
>> $4 BILLION GOT CUT FROM STATE
MENTAL HEALTH BUDGETS DURING THE
RECESSION.
THAT'S MONEY THAT GOES TO
SUPPORT COMMUNITY CLINICS THAT
ARE SUPPOSED TO BE THE SAFETY
NET.
ON THE OBAMACARE FRONT,
OBAMACARE DID TRY TO ADDRESS
THIS ISSUE, REQUIRING INSURERS
TO PROVIDE MENTAL HEALTH
SERVICES, NOT JUST MEDICAL
SERVICES.
BUT THE PROBLEM IS YOU MIGHT
HAVE INSURANCE BUT CAN'T FIND A
DOCTOR WHO WILL TAKE YOUR
INSURANCE.
OR --
>> BECAUSE IT DIDN'T ADD 1,000
NEW PSYCHIATRISTS INTO THE
SYSTEM.
>> AND THERE ARE SOME
INDICATIONS THAT THE OBAMACARE
INSURANCE PLANS PAY DOCTORS EVEN
LESS THAN OTHER PRIVATE
INSURANCE PLANS SO DOCTORS ARE
EVEN LESS LIKELY TO TAKE THE
PLANS SOLD ON THE OBAMACARE
EXCHANGE.
>> Sreenivasan: SHANNON
PETTYPIECE, FROM BLOOMBERG NEWS,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>>THIS IS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: AND NOW TO
"VIEWERS LIKE YOU," YOUR CHANCE
TO COMMENT ON SOME OF OUR RECENT
WORK.
MANY OF YOU WROTE US ABOUT LAST
WEEKEND'S SIGNATURE PIECE FROM
HAWAII EXPLORING THAT STATE'S
DIFFICULTIES IMPLEMENTING SOLAR
POWER.
SOME RESIDENTS THERE SPENT
THOUSANDS OF DOLLARS ON SOLAR
PANELS, ONLY TO BE TOLD BY THE
LOCAL UTILITY COMPANY NOT TO
TURN ON THE SWITCH BECAUSE THE
POWER THEY WOULD GENERATE MIGHT
OVERWHELM THE SYSTEM.
MIKEATHINKER HAD THIS TO SAY:
"THE ROOFTOP SOLAR INDUSTRY MADE
A BAD ASSUMPTION THAT THEY COULD
JUST SHOVE ALL THE ROOFTOP-
GENERATED POWER BACK UP THE GRID
AT ANY TIME AND EVERYTHING WOULD
BE SWEETNESS AND BUTTERFLIES.
AS SOMEONE WHO WORKED EARLY IN
MY CAREER IN THE POWER INDUSTRY,
THAT IS DECIDEDLY NOT HOW IT
WORKS, AND THE SYSTEM IS LARGELY
NOT READY FOR THAT KIND OF
'BACKFLOW,' PARTICULARLY BECAUSE
IT IS SO ERRATIC AND
UNRELIABLE."
MIKE LEE TOOK ISSUE WITH THOSE
WHO HAD MADE THE SWITCH TO
SOLAR: "THIS IS WHAT HAPPENS
WHEN YOU HAVE TOO MANY LIBERALS
LIVING IN THE SAME PLACE."
CANDID ONE WARNED: "THE U.S.
DOESN'T HAVE MUCH LEEWAY TOWARD
AN ENHANCED GRID OPTION.
HAWAII'S EXAMPLE IS SCHOOL
TIME."
PROUDLIBERALAMERICAN HAD SOME
ADVICE: "BETTER THAT THESE
PRODUCERS STAY ON THE GRID AND
CONTINUE TO PAY A SMALL CHARGE
TO HELP MAINTAIN IT AND HAVE THE
EXCESS THEY PRODUCE OFFSET THIS
COST AND PROVIDE POWER TO HELP
REPLACE OUTDATED, INEFFICIENT
AND POLLUTING CENTRALIZED POWER
PLANTS."
SHANE ALGARIN ADDED: "ANYBODY
WHO REMEMBERS ENRON, THE RIGGING
OF ELECTRICITY MARKETS,
ARTIFICIAL BLACKOUTS, PEOPLE
DYING BECAUSE THEIR MEDICAL
EQUIPMENT DEPENDED ON
ELECTRICITY, KNOWS WHY IT'S GOOD
TO ESCAPE THE TENTACLES OF THE
UTILITIES."
AS ALWAYS, WE WELCOME YOUR
COMMENTS.
VISIT US AT
www.pbs.org/newshour, ON OUR
FACEBOOK PAGE, OR TWEET US
@NEWSHOUR.
>> Sreenivasan: SOME MORE NEWS
BEFORE WE LEAVE YOU TONIGHT.
A MAJOR DISPUTE BETWEEN ISRAELI
AND PALESTINIAN OFFICIALS HAS
BEEN RESOLVED.
ISRAEL WILL RELEASE $500 MILLION
IN TAX REVENUES TO THE
PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY MAKING IT
POSSIBLE FOR THE PALESTINIANS TO
PAY THEIR CIVIL SERVANTS.
BMW IS RECALLING NEARLY 92,000
MINI COOPERS BECAUSE OF A DEFECT
THAT MAY PREVENT THE
PASSENGER-SIDE AIRBAG FROM
DEPLOYING IN A CRASH.
IT AFFECTS 2005-2008 MODELS OF
THE MINI COOPER AND COOPER S.
AND AFTER 53 YEARS, THE WORLD'S
LONGEST RUNNING TV VARIETY SHOW,
UNIVISION'S "SABADO GIGANTE,"
WILL END PRODUCTION IN
SEPTEMBER.
THE SHOW AIRS IN AT LEAST 40
COUNTRIES.
THAT'S ALL FOR TONIGHT.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.